BUILDING R.O.B. - VOLUME 4


MISSION CONTROL
Control ownership, maps, cameras, private messages, and responsible AI




A COMPUTER-SCIENCE FIELD GUIDE FOR MAKERS AGES 12-16
Rodolfo Aramayo / OrbitusRobotics LLC -   First Maker Faire Edition
Programs cooperate by making
promises
Follow one command from a human hand to a moving tread, then follow sensor data back.

ROB’s software spans Arduino C++, Objective-C and Objective-C++, Swift, Python helpers, Apple plat-
forms, cameras, lidar, speech, and optional cloud AI. You do not need to master all of those at once. You
need to understand the boundary each part owns.
This book describes the clean repository snapshots inspected through 23 August 2026. ROBControllerVi-
sion’s latest three panorama-orientation commits were still ahead of its public remote, and hardware-
dependent features remain labeled as experimental or unverified. The labs stay in simulation unless a
qualified adult provides an isolated test rig.




Copyright © 2026 OrbitusRobotics LLC. All rights reserved. Rodolfo Aramayo is the author and photographer.
Photographs are from the private ROB build archive unless otherwise noted. Generated covers, frontispieces, story
scenes, and conceptual teaching plates are original project illustrations derived from or inspired by ROB reference
photographs. They are illustrations, not documentary photographs, technical drawings, or evidence of the as-built
configuration. Source-code licenses remain separate and repository-specific. This independent educational project
is not affiliated with or endorsed by any film studio or franchise owner. Product and company names remain the
property of their respective owners.

First evidence-based draft: 2 August 2026. This historical engineering edition distinguishes documented facts,
builder recollection, experiments, plans, and facts not established by the available evidence.
MISSION CONTROL                                                                                    VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16



The Building R.O.B. library
  VOLUME 1                Meet ROB: A Robot Is a Team of Systems - ages 8-12
  VOLUME 2                Circuits and Signals with ROB - ages 10-14
  VOLUME 3                Motion Workshop: Treads, Gears, and Fabrication - ages 10-15
  VOLUME 4                Mission Control: Arduino, Mac, Networks, and Vision - ages 12-16
  VOLUME 5                AI, Robotics, and Codex: Directing, Verifying, and Owning AI-Built Systems - advanced
                          makers
  VOLUME 6                Dual-Arm Robotics: AMBER B1, URDF, CAN, and Ubuntu - advanced makers
  VOLUME 7                Engineering ROBControllerVision: Swift, Spatial Input, Video, and Speech - Swift devel-
                          opers
  VOLUME 8                Engineering Cerebro: Perception, Models, H.264, and Robot Coordination - software en-
                          gineers
  MANUAL                  Building R.O.B.: The Complete Maker’s Field Manual - advanced builders


   HOW TO USE THIS BOOK

   Use the diagrams to predict where data travels, where it is validated, and which component owns the
   final safety decision. Then run the paper or simulator mission. Never test new network or AI code
   first on powered treads.

   ONE CURRENT ARDUINO, THREE HISTORICAL SKETCHES

   The ROBArduino archive preserves Base, Torso, and Head sketches from an earlier three-Arduino de-
   sign. The builder reports that present-day ROB uses only the Base sketch. This book therefore treats
   Base behavior as the current low-level firmware reference and labels Torso and Head behavior as re-
   tired historical evidence. Source files cannot prove which binary is flashed today; record the board
   identity, firmware hash, build environment, and upload date before operation.

   TWO AMBER B1 ARMS, ONE DOCUMENTED CONTROL CHAIN

   ROB carries two seven-joint AMBER B1 arms. The repository snapshot separates their Ubuntu-side
   cores as L-10 and R-11: network clients use UDP or LCM, each core binds a stable CAN interface, and
   CAN carries commands and feedback between that core and its arm actuators. The AmberHomeFolder
   tree is evidence from one Ubuntu machine, not a deployable image; never copy its credentials, logs,
   virtual environment, or machine-specific identifiers. Volume 6 documents the inspected protocol,
   URDF models, reproducible setup, verification gates, and unresolved configuration differences.

   HOW TO FIND THE FILES

   Open the public repositories on GitHub and follow each printed repository-relative path: https:
   //github.com/RudyAramayo/ROBBooks, https://github.com/RudyAramayo/ROBArduino, https:
   //github.com/RudyAramayo/Cerebro, https://github.com/RudyAramayo/ROBController, https://gi
   thub.com/RudyAramayo/ROBControllerVision, https://github.com/RudyAramayo/Amber-HomeFolder,
   and https://github.com/RudyAramayo/ROBTrainingGames. The website is published separately
   at https://github.com/OrbitusRoboticsWebSite/ORobotics. See https://github.com/RudyA
   ramayo/ROBBooks/blob/main/ROB-Books/OPEN-SOURCE-CODE-MAP.md for clickable repository and file



ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                                    3 / 34
MISSION CONTROL                                                                               VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16




   links, license cautions, and renamed-file search instructions. A named archival item without a verified
   public repository is labeled as evidence, not given an invented URL.

    SOFTWARE CAN MOVE HARDWARE

   A one-line program can command a high-energy actuator. All exercises default to printed frames,
   LEDs, or a simulated robot. Connecting to ROB requires a named operator, an exclusion zone, a
   spotter, a tested physical emergency stop, lifted-tread sign checks, strict speed limits, and permission
   from the builder.




ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                               4 / 34
Contents
1 One goal, many programs                           2

2 The Mac mini as a robot computer                  6

3 Phone, Watch, and Vision Pro                      10

4 Pairing and secure robot messages                 14

5 Control and camera data take separate roads       17

6 How ROB sees space                                19

7 Helpful intelligence, human authority             23

8 Tests, logs, and reproducible missions            27

9 A robot never receives “just a command”           31

10 Autonomy is a bounded state machine              33




                                                5
MISSION CONTROL                                VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16




ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                6 / 34
MISSION 1


Follow the control stack
MISSION 1


One goal, many programs
Imagine an operator nudges a joystick forward. ROB’s controllers encode that gesture in different ways:
the current iPhone path places raw joystick coordinates in its legacy snapshot, while the Vision Pro con-
troller derives normalized linear and angular intent. A secure network carries the intent to Cerebro on the
Mac mini. Cerebro decides whether that controller owns motion authority, translates the values into the
historical base frame, and refreshes the Arduino over USB. The Arduino sets pins. Motor electronics drive
the treads.
The USB device name can change when a cable moves to another hub. Current Cerebro therefore scans
only USB callout ports, resets each candidate, and listens for the existing Base sketch’s exact line, BEGIN
BASE STARTUP SEQUENCE. It sends no serial command bytes and requires no Arduino firmware flash. The
refresh control closes the old Base connection and runs discovery again. The startup label selects the
intended firmware role; it is not authentication and does not prove the harness is safe.


                                   Operator intent - iPhone, Apple Watch, or Vision Pro controller



                      Authenticated control session - pairing, TLS/QUIC, roles, sequence, applicable freshness



                              Cerebro on macOS - UI, coordination, cameras, speech, autonomy gates



                                          USB serial heartbeat - fixed base command frame



                                 Arduino base controller - PWM, direction, brakes, actuator, IMU, IR



                   Physical plant - treads, flippers, linear actuator (installed role to verify), battery and mechanics



This architecture separates concerns:

• Interface: What does the human mean?
• Transport: Which authenticated device sent the message, and is it fresh?
• Coordination: Who currently controls the robot, and what behavior is allowed?
• Hardware adapter: How does a controller command become ROB’s legacy seven-field serial frame?
• Firmware: Which output pins and controller bytes represent the command?
• Physical plant: What motion actually occurs?


                                                                    2
MISSION CONTROL                                                                                       VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16



   COMPUTER SCIENCE CONNECTION

   An interface is a promise between components. It should say valid inputs, outputs, timing, errors,
   and ownership. Internal code can change while the promise stays stable. That is how large systems
   remain understandable.




     Historical presentation page 72 sketches a Mac mini M1, two Raspberry Pi 4 controllers, an inverter, and a
     12-to-24 V converter. It records an earlier architecture; the current builder record now identifies the M4 Mac
     mini and AMBER Ubuntu box as the principal computers.


   THREE MAC MINI ERAS

   ROB first carried an Intel Mac mini, then an M1, and now an M4 Mac mini running Cerebro. Nearby
   are an AMBER Robotics Ubuntu computer for the arm kinematics/CAN infrastructure, a 24-channel
   Pololu Maestro for the neck servos, Hecate USB/Bluetooth speakers, depth cameras, a conference
   microphone, and service peripherals. A fanless sine-wave inverter is recalled as 150 W continuous
   and 300 W peak. The part labels and measured power draw still need a photographed audit.




ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                                       3 / 34
MISSION CONTROL                                                                                                                   VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16



                                                                                                                                    Arduino Mega
                                                                                                                                      USB serial



                                                                       B-COMMAND rotary link               base USB hub
                                                                          power + data path               + USB--Ethernet



                                                                                                                                  RPLidar Ethernet
           Mac mini M4         USB-C    powered USB-C / USB 3 hub                                                                 model / host verify
             Cerebro                      power budget required




                                                                          USB-A fan-out hub          Pololu stepper controller
                                                                     externally power if approved    Maestro 24-channel servo

       backpack Wi-Fi router                                        Mac mini / AMBER Ubuntu box
                                          Netgear Ethernet switch
       home Orbi participant                                               Insta360 Pro II
                                                                                                    speakers + keyboard dongle
                                                                                                      other service peripherals


Current builder narrative, not a photographed port audit. Every hub must have a measured upstream/downstream power budget; repeated USB
                             power shutdown is a fault to resolve, not a nuisance to bypass with an unreviewed cable.


Two USB-C hubs currently expand the M4 Mac mini, with another USB-A fan-out serving the stepper con-
troller, Maestro, speakers, and keyboard dongle. The builder reports hub over-current shutdowns. An
extension or receptacle adapter can change connector reach, but it cannot create more power. The engi-
neering response is to inventory every device’s idle, startup, and peak draw; use an approved externally
powered hub with adequate per-port and total current; keep USB 3 signal integrity through the rotary link;
and test camera plus controller load while watching the Mac’s USB diagnostics.
The network has a separate shape. A backpack router joins the home Orbi Wi-Fi network, while a Netgear
switch adds wired ports for the Mac mini, AMBER Ubuntu box, and Insta360 Pro II. Ethernet, USB, and
power may share a physical enclosure but they solve different problems. Label each cable at both ends
and record which component supplies power.

   CURRENT COMPONENTS, UNTRACED TOPOLOGY

   The author identifies the M4 Mac mini, two USB-C hubs, a USB-A fan-out, Mega 2560, Maestro, Tic,
   AMBER Ubuntu computer, NETGEAR/Orbi networking, Insta360 Pro II, and separate depth-camera
   roles. The present port-by-port tree, hub models, power supplies, bus currents, service peripherals,
   and redacted system_profiler snapshot have not been recorded. This diagram teaches ownership
   and troubleshooting; it is not a cable-installation plan.




ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                                                                        4 / 34
MISSION 2


Cerebro coordinates the body
MISSION 2


The Mac mini as a robot
computer
  SOURCE TRAIL --- ANALYZING NOW

  File: Cerebro/Cerebro/ROBMainViewController.mm
  Why it is here: This central coordinator joins controller intent, robot state, helpers, autonomy, and
  operator-visible behavior. Follow its referenced classes rather than treating one large file as the entire
  system.

Cerebro is the macOS controller and operator interface. Its current source contains several distinct re-
sponsibilities:

  CEREBRO EXISTED BEFORE THE V5 GIT RESET

  The current public repository begins with a fresh v5 import from August 2025, but five preserved work-
  shop folders recover the earlier story. A pre-Git v1 archive contains ROB-specific Mac serial-control
  work dated 2017-2018. The first surviving Git history starts on 1 January 2018, then grows through
  speech, separate Base/Head/Torso links, depth-camera and hand-tracking experiments, controller
  arbitration, servos, human tracking, network video, Apple-silicon migration, and early LLM work. The
  v5 commit created a new Git history around an existing application; it did not create Cerebro in one
  day. The source evidence and fingerprints are recorded in ROB-Books/CEREBRO_ARCHIVE_HISTORY.md.


• windows and controls for a human operator;
• the present Base Arduino serial connection, plus legacy Cerebro paths named for retired Torso and
  Head Arduinos and servo hardware;
• authenticated sessions from controllers and a role-limited lidar publisher;
• camera capture, RGB-D helper supervision, Vision processing, and video service;
• consent-based local face identity, a private Messages bridge, and explicit training-data recording;
• local speech recognition and speech synthesis;
• bounded autonomy coordination and optional Gemini integration;
• arm scripts and reusable keyframe animation data.

The project mixes Swift with Objective-C and Objective-C++. That is not automatically bad. Mature sys-
tems often cross language generations. A narrow adapter can let new typed code cooperate with a his-
torical interface while migration happens safely.




                                                      6
     MISSION CONTROL                                                                                                           VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16




     A fanless mini computer with labeled USB and serial connections        Original illustration: abstract paths represent control, perception, and
     shows the practical side of software architecture.                     state without exposing real logs, accounts, or network details.



     Event loops and state
     A graphical Mac app reacts to events: a button click, a network message, a camera frame, a timer, or serial
     data. Long work cannot freeze the main event loop. Camera processing drops stale frames rather than
     building an unlimited backlog. A Python DepthAI helper is supervised as a separate process so a camera
     disconnect or SDK failure does not crash robot control.

        COMPUTER SCIENCE CONNECTION

        This is fault isolation. If one optional subsystem fails, the system reports its own unavailable state
        while unrelated safety and control paths continue. “Everything in one giant loop” is simple only until
        one slow task blocks every other job.



     Mac message lab: build, inspect, do not transmit
     The real Mac adapter is Objective-C, but a short Python exercise can reveal the same message shape
     without opening a serial port. Save this on a Mac and run it in Terminal. It only prints one neutral classroom
     frame.

                                         Listing 2.1: A print-only Mac exercise; it does not connect to ROB.
1      def field(value):
2           if not -9999 <= value <= 9999:
3                 raise ValueError("outside signed five-character range")
4           return f"{value:+05d}"
5
6      values = [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]
7      frame = "~" + ",".join(field(value) for value in values)
8
9      assert len(frame) == 42
10     print(frame)



     The companion file tools/mac_serial_frame_lab.py also parses a frame and labels all seven values. A
     hardware version would need an approved serial device, exact baud configuration, complete input val-
     idation, a physical stop path, and supervised tests; those capabilities are intentionally absent from the
     lab.

     ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                                                             7 / 34
MISSION CONTROL                                                                          VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16



   CHANGE ONE THING

   Run the offline lab, change one tread value from 0 to 100, and compare the two strings. Predict
   which five characters will change before running it. Then deliberately remove a comma and ask the
   companion parser to reject the frame.

   STATE-MACHINE CARDS

   Make cards labeled Disconnected, Connecting, Authenticated, Armed, Stopped, and Faulted. Draw
   only the allowed transitions. Does reconnecting automatically reset a stop? It should not. Add the
   event required for each arrow.




ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                          8 / 34
MISSION 3


Many controllers, one authority
MISSION 3


Phone, Watch, and Vision Pro
  SOURCE TRAIL --- ANALYZING NOW

  File: ROBController/Consciousness/ConsciousViewController.mm
  Why it is here: This is the starting point for the handheld controller UI. Compare its shared mes-
  sage types with the corresponding decoder in Cerebro and the SwiftUI spatial controller under
  ROBControllerVision.


ROB has several ways to express operator intent, but only one component should own motion at a time.

                   ROLE                                          IMPORTANT BOUNDARY
 DEVICE
                   Map, joysticks, push-to-talk, flipper, actu- Holds its own paired controller identity
 iPhone / iPad     ator, autonomy and AI-action UI.             and can explicitly request or release drive
                                                                ownership.
                   Voice and joystick intent relayed through Does not browse for ROB or store robot
 Apple Watch       the phone.                                   credentials; stale watch motion stops at
                                                                the relay.
                   SwiftUI cockpit, simulator, normalized Uses short drive/arm leases and separate
 Vision Pro        commands, dual-arm panel, three video authenticated video pipelines.
                   feeds, and immersive 360 view.
Normalized motion usually means values between -1 and +1. That keeps a user interface independent of
physical top speed. The robot later converts the normalized request into its configured limits.
The latest operator to press Request Control becomes the drive owner only after Cerebro stops the pre-
vious owner’s motion. Release Control stops ROB and returns ownership to Cerebro. Each phone/tablet
and Vision Pro needs a different paired credential, and the UI displays Cerebro’s authoritative owner rather
than guessing from a local button.
Vision Pro arm control is a separate domain. Each AMBER arm needs fresh measured seven-joint feed-
back, position mode, its own time-limited authority, bounded targets, and a hold result. Two PSVR Sense
controllers can jog the matching selected joints together only while both grips are held. This is measured
joint jogging, not “move the arm wherever the controller points,” and it still requires restrained hardware
testing.
One readable differential-drive mix is:


                          L = clamp(F + T, −1, 1),        R = clamp(F − T, −1, 1)

where F is forward intent and T is turn intent. A speed cap multiplies both outputs before they reach the
robot.

  JOYSTICK GRAPH

  Draw a coordinate square from -1 to +1 on each axis. Choose five (F, T ) points. Calculate L and
  R, clamp them, and predict the motion. Then reverse the sign convention and notice why written


                                                     10
MISSION CONTROL                                                                                                                                               VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16




   coordinate definitions matter.



Freshness is part of the command
Current controller layers use short timing limits: the Vision control model uses a 250 ms lease, the Watch
relay uses roughly a 450 ms watchdog, and Cerebro expires a stale control snapshot at about 600 ms.
These values belong to different layers and do not prove the Arduino’s loop-count heartbeat duration.

            input released                     controller-specific             Cerebro 0.6 s                           Arduino serial                     commanded stop;
            or manual stop                     lease / watchdog               freshness gate                             deadman                        result must be tested




                                                                                                         independent of software
                                                                     required verified physical E-stop                      independent contactor / controller stop path




   FROM ROB'S BUILD LOG

   Cerebro sends one neutral/braked base frame when controller snapshots expire, then stops refresh-
   ing USB so the Arduino’s independent heartbeat also expires. The current Arduino timeout command
   uses zero speeds with brake fields that map to released brakes. The physical coast/hold result must
   be measured; do not call it “braked” at the Arduino layer.




ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                                                                                                11 / 34
MISSION CONTROL                                                                                   VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16


     Conceptual illustration: the software chain ends in a commanded state. An independently wired and verified
     physical stop must still interrupt motion authority when software, communications, or assumptions fail.




ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                                 12 / 34
MISSION 4


Discovery is not trust
MISSION 4


Pairing and secure robot
messages
  SOURCE TRAIL --- ANALYZING NOW

  File: ROBController/Consciousness/AutoNetClient/AutoNetDataTransferProtocol.swift
  Why it is here:       This client-side wire-contract implementation is the file being ana-
  lyzed for identity, framing, authentication, sequencing, and freshness.    Compare it with
  Cerebro/Cerebro/AutoNet/AutoNetShared/AutoNetDataTransferProtocol.swift.


ROBControl v2 uses a reliable QUIC stream over UDP with TLS 1.3. Cerebro advertises a local Bonjour
service named _robctl._udp and uses the application protocol name robctl/2. Those names help a con-
troller find a candidate robot, but discovery alone does not prove identity.
A simplified pairing story is:

1. Cerebro creates a code for one named device and one narrow role.
2. The device stores the robot ID, its own credential ID and secret, and the exact server certificate finger-
   print in Keychain.
3. On connection, TLS protects the link and the device pins the expected certificate.
4. Both sides prove knowledge of the pairing secret using a fresh challenge.
5. Each layer performs the checks that apply to its data: transport framing checks size, role, session, and
   sequence; timestamped sensor messages add capture-time freshness; controller freshness uses Cere-
   bro’s local receipt time; and the legacy application payload still needs its own parsing and validation.

  COMPUTER SCIENCE CONNECTION
  Authentication asks who the peer is. Authorization asks what that peer may do. ROB’s lidar pub-
  lisher may send typed sensor data but cannot request motion. A controller may request allowed
  control messages but cannot become a lidar publisher just by changing a word in its own payload.

  NEVER PRINT REAL PAIRING MATERIAL

  Book screenshots and Maker Faire displays must not reveal enrollment codes, API keys, Wi-Fi pass-
  words, SSH credentials, private keys, device secrets, precise location data, or private console logs. A
  server certificate fingerprint is a public identity pin, not a secret; it may still be redacted from screen-
  shots as operational metadata. Give every device a unique secret so one device can be revoked
  without disabling another.
  The current iPhone controller requests Always location access and includes live latitude and longi-
  tude in each active legacy snapshot. Motion control does not inherently need precise location. Treat
  this as current privacy debt: remove it, minimize it, or document a specific need and consent policy
  before a public demonstration.



                                                      14
MISSION CONTROL                                                                        VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16



   LOCKED MAILBOX GAME

   Give three students cards: Operator, Lidar, and Guest. Write allowed message types on role cards.
   For each pretend packet, check identity first, then role, then sequence number, then freshness. A
   correctly signed Lidar packet still may not contain a drive command.




ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                      15 / 34
MISSION 5


Keep video away from stop
traffic
MISSION 5


Control and camera data take
separate roads
Live video is much larger than a joystick command. If both share one congested queue, a delayed cam-
era frame could sit in front of a stop message. Cerebro therefore advertises a separate authenticated
_robvideo._udp service using robvideo/1. Independent front, belly, and insta360 H.264 feeds each have
their own bounded pipeline on the media connection.


                                             small, urgent control
            paired controller                                                         Cerebro
                                                 robctl/2




                                            large, droppable media
                                                robvideo/1



The video connection still depends on the exact live control session and the same authenticated controller.
The client opens the media stream after authentication and subscribes to each camera separately. If con-
trol disconnects, the associated video sessions close. If one video feed fails, control and the other feeds
can remain available. On Vision Pro the panorama can appear in a flat window or on an inward-facing
mixed-immersive sphere; entering that view brakes motion even when video is intentionally preserved.

  COMPUTER SCIENCE CONNECTION

  This is a quality-of-service decision expressed through architecture. Urgent control is small and
  bounded. Media may drop old frames when the sender falls behind. The freshest useful image is
  usually better than a growing pile of late images.




                                                     17
MISSION 6


Color, depth, and laser points
MISSION 6


How ROB sees space
   SOURCE TRAIL --- ANALYZING NOW

  File: Cerebro/Cerebro/CameraManager.swift
  Why it is here: This file owns a bounded camera/depth delivery path. Lidar acquisition lives sep-
  arately under M2M1-RPLIDAR-iOS-MacOS-Catalyst-/RPLidar; the chapter names the source when it
  changes sensor.

ROB’s camera path can produce aligned color and depth. A color pixel describes brightness and color
channels. A depth pixel describes estimated distance, currently carried as an unsigned 16-bit number of
millimeters; zero means invalid. Alignment lets software ask, “What distance belongs to this color pixel?”
The builder identifies an OAK-D Pro Wide in the body/belly and an OAK-D Pro autofocus camera at the
head/face, while the Insta360 Pro II supplies 360-degree imagery. Each role has its own device identity,
socket, helper state, rate budget, and calibration. Luxonis model options differ in field of view, color
focus, shutter type, and power demand, so Cerebro should record the product name and board revision
returned by the device rather than infer it from appearance.
One supervised Python DepthAI helper owns each selected OAK-D and sends synchronized data to Cere-
bro through a private local Unix socket. RGB enters the camera/Vision path. Depth travels beside it in a
frame set. If a helper or device fails, Cerebro reports that camera’s state and retries with bounded back-
off instead of terminating robot control. A separate headless Insta360 service maintains camera control,
heartbeat, RTMP/ffmpeg preview, demand-driven decode, and six-sector perception.




                                             An OAK-D stereo depth
camera has multiple optical elements because depth requires geomet-        Historical presentation page 74 combines the Insta360 head concept
ric information beyond one ordinary image.                                 with an OAK-D Lite crown camera. The current builder account instead
                                                                           identifies an Insta360 Pro II panoramic camera and an autofocus
                                                                           OAK-D Pro at the head.



Lidar uses polar samples
                                                                      19
MISSION CONTROL                                                                                      VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16




RPLidar reports distances at angles around the robot. A point (r, θ) can be converted into a flat Cartesian
point:


                                               x = r cos θ,   y = r sin θ.

The companion app publishes all valid points that fit its bounded range/count contract, not the former
sub-meter front/back slice. Compact RLS1 frames carry a fixed header plus four bytes per point; a 720-
point scan is about 2.95 KB. Same-Mac delivery prefers authenticated App Group Unix-domain IPC and
automatically falls back to the paired QUIC publisher route.
Occupancy maps are a separate product. The app aligns updates using the pose captured with the scan,
can save/load/reset .robomap data, and overlays the result on selectable base maps with adjustable scale
and north rotation. Rotation is a human calibration unless a trusted heading source exists. A map, route,
or destination is context, not permission to drive; stale required sensing still stops the active autonomy
path.
The lidar was a later physical stage, braced with three 3/8-inch threaded rods. The builder reports its
Ethernet descending to a USB hub through a USB–Ethernet adapter beside the Arduino’s USB connection.
That mechanical stage needs a measured sensor-to-base transform, vibration check, cable strain relief,
and proof that the rods do not intrude into camera or arm envelopes.

   DRAW A TINY LIDAR MAP
   Plot these polar points on graph paper: (4, 0◦ ), (4, 90◦ ), (4, 180◦ ), and (4, 270◦ ). Convert each to (x, y).
   Add noisy points and decide how many samples you need before calling a region occupied.

   ADVANCED CHANNEL

   Coordinate frames must be named: sensor frame, robot frame, map frame, camera frame, and arm
   frame. A point is not useful for grasping until calibrated transforms connect those frames. The reposi-
   tory does not yet contain the complete camera-to-arm calibration, inverse kinematics, collision check-
   ing, or verified grasp executor needed for autonomous pickup.




ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                                    20 / 34
MISSION CONTROL                                                                               VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16




     Historical presentation page 55 places a proposed lidar stage above the base. A drawing can suggest a
     coordinate frame, but the installed transform must be measured.




ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                             21 / 34
MISSION 7


Speech and AI stay inside
boundaries
MISSION 7


Helpful intelligence, human
authority
Cerebro can recognize speech locally and speak responses through its existing voice path. An optional,
explicitly enabled Gemini integration can receive microphone audio and sampled camera frames. That
changes the privacy boundary because data may leave the robot for a cloud service.


A face label is not a key
Cerebro’s separate face-identity feature is disabled by default. A paired operator and a person standing
with ROB can confirm enrollment and collect 24 varied examples. Vision checks face position, landmarks,
and quality; a selected AdaFace model converts an aligned 112-by-112 crop into a 512-number embed-
ding. The encrypted local gallery stores opaque profile IDs, model-tagged embeddings, and samples
with a device-only key. It can delete a whole profile.
WebFace4M is the recommended default encoder; VGGFace2 is available for careful comparison. Their
embeddings must never be mixed, and the current distance/margin settings still need false-accept, false-
reject, replay, lighting, pose, and occlusion tests on ROB. Recognition expires quickly and enters the
scene only as uncertain context. A face called “administrator” can personalize a greeting, but it cannot
grant control, approve an AI action, run a command, or reveal a secret.


Messages without robot tools
The optional Messages bridge is also disabled by default. It accepts only exact allowlisted senders
in one-to-one chats, remembers a high-water mark so old messages are not replayed, fails closed on
groups/reactions/stale or unexpected items, and limits accepted traffic. Every chat receives an isolated
AI conversation with no motor, Music, arbitrary-file, device, camera, or microphone tools.
One bounded image may be normalized without metadata. Optional transcript memory is encrypted,
scoped to the same sender/account, bounded, searchable/exportable, and clearable; sending selected
excerpts to Gemini is a separate cloud disclosure. Fixed news publishers and Open-Meteo weather pro-
vide limited current information without exposing the Mac’s location or caller-supplied URLs.
Exact commands from locally configured administrator handles can ask the Mac to shut down or reboot,
but only after exact YES from the same sender/chat within 90 seconds. That deterministic path runs before
AI, never inserts message text into a shell, and deserves a critical local warning. Do not print real handles
or scripts in this book.


Record evidence only when a human starts it
An explicit recording session can synchronize face/belly RGB, lossless aligned depth, stereo, calibration,
exact lidar, pose, odometry, tread/authority, traversability labels, and separate camera movies. The ses-
sion is append-only and recoverable; ordinary preview does not silently start it. Requested, observed, and


                                                     23
MISSION CONTROL                                                                                                   VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16



encoded dimensions stay distinct. Autonomous commands may be logged, but they never create their
own labels. Consent, free space, retention, deletion, and dataset review remain human responsibilities.
The safer action pattern below is a target architecture. It shows the structure every physical action should
eventually follow; it is not evidence that every current tool has an executor.


                 perceive                      propose a bounded      validate capability   deterministic   measured terminal
               and converse                     high-level action     and human policy        executor           result



The language model does not receive a tool for arbitrary raw serial bytes. The current schema names five
proposals: look_at, play_gesture, request_pick, navigate_relative, and stop_motion. Only stop_motion
has an immediate local executor, and its result is deliberately partial: Cerebro can software-stop the base,
but arm hold remains unverified. The other four actions do not yet have deterministic executors. Outside
autonomy they may reach a controller approval console, but approval records a human decision and does
not actuate hardware; during active autonomy they fail as unavailable.
Controller-authorized destination navigation is a separate deterministic feature, not an executor for a
model’s navigate_relative proposal. It uses bounded geocoding/planning, a 50 m pilot limit, and fresh
pose/map/lidar/depth/authority gates. The OAK sidewalk model may contribute centerline context, and
learned traversability comes only from manually traversed, odometry-confirmed ground. Manual takeover
or stale required sensing stops the motion path.

  ACTION                               CURRENT                 STA- HONEST RESULT
                                       TUS
  stop_motion                          Partial local execu- Preempts local coordinators, sends one neutral/braked
                                       tor                  base frame, and drops the base heartbeat; arm hold is un-
                                                            verified.
  look_at                              Schema only          No deterministic executor; approval alone does not move
                                                            the neck.
  play_gesture                         Schema only          No deterministic executor; approval alone does not play a
                                                            physical gesture.
  navigate_relative                    Schema only          No deterministic executor; it is not the social-roam con-
                                                            troller.
  request_pick                         Planned / unavail- Rejected until calibration, planning, feedback, and a verified
                                       able                 grasp executor exist.

   FROM ROB'S BUILD LOG

   In the inspected snapshot, general picking remains unavailable. The source explicitly lacks calibrated
   camera-to-arm transforms, complete neck-axis mapping, joint feedback, inverse kinematics, collision
   checking, and a verified grasp executor. The controller’s AI approval console records a decision but
   does not by itself execute an arm action.

    PUBLIC CAMERA AND MICROPHONE NOTICE

   A Maker Faire demonstration should clearly announce when cameras, microphones, recording, or
   cloud AI are active; provide a visible activity indicator and rapid disable control; avoid collecting
   unnecessary location or identity data; and obtain appropriate consent, especially around children.
   The entire Gemini integration defaults off. Once it is enabled, however, the current configuration
   defaults microphone-audio and camera-frame streaming on unless each is separately disabled; the


ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                                                    24 / 34
MISSION CONTROL                                                                                      VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16




    robot-action tool remains separately off by default. Verify every switch rather than relying on one “AI
    enabled” label.
    Face identity, Messages, transcript memory, and recording each have their own enable, consent,
    retention, and deletion boundary. Turning on one must not silently turn on another.

   HUMAN-IN-CHARGE ROLE PLAY

   One student is the model, one the validator, one the operator, and one the simulator. The model may
   propose only named actions. The validator rejects unsupported or unsafe parameters. The operator
   approves or denies. The simulator returns a measured result. Discuss why “the model sounded
   confident” is not a validation rule.




     Original illustration: the glowing pathways represent a proposed flow from perception to validation to deter-
     ministic execution. They are not a screenshot or proof that every action exists.




ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                                    25 / 34
MISSION 8


Simulation makes mistakes
inexpensive
MISSION 8


Tests, logs, and reproducible
missions
ROBControllerVision includes a deterministic simulator and a normalized control model. That is a pow-
erful pattern: the same user interface can exercise a simulated endpoint before a physical adapter is
selected.
A useful test names:

• initial state;
• exact input and timestamp;
• expected output or rejection;
• deadline;
• cleanup behavior;
• evidence retained when it fails.




                                                 27
MISSION CONTROL                                                                                       VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16



                                       EXPECTED SAFE OBSERVATION
  FAILURE TO INJECT
                                       Zero intent is sent promptly.
  Joystick release
                                       Phone relay stops watch motion after its freshness deadline.
  Watch link disappears
                                       Cerebro neutralizes once and lets the USB heartbeat expire.
  Controller snapshots
  stop
                                       Transport rejects it before application dispatch.
  Malformed           ROBCon-
  trol frame
                         The application decoder must reject it; authenticated transport alone does not
  Malformed legacy con- make payload contents valid.
  troller payload
                         Old video frames drop; control queue remains independent.
  Video sender falls be-
  hind
                         Cerebro stops the old owner before accepting fresh motion from the new owner.
  Controller takeover
                         Both PSVR joint-jog loops request hold; neither reuses the old stick sample.
  Either     arm    grip
  releases
                         Camera reports unavailable and retries; robot control remains alive.
  Depth helper exits
                         Autonomy stops and waits rather than inventing space.
  Lidar becomes stale
                         Recognition remains unknown; no authority changes.
  Wrong face/model or
  replay image
                         The bridge produces no AI turn or robot action.
  Group       or    non-
  allowlisted Message
                         Capture stops/reports a recoverable partial session; no label is invented.
  Recorder runs out of
  space
                         A clear unavailable result returns; no motion is faked.
  Unsupported AI action




ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                                     28 / 34
MISSION CONTROL                                                                                                           VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16




Original illustration: software pathways are explanatory symbols, not   Conceptual illustration: the test ladder leads from bounded simulation
a current-system screenshot.                                            toward reviewed physical tests; a successful display alone does not
                                                                        prove safe behavior.


   WRITE A TEST TABLE

   Choose one simulated command. Create columns for sequence number, issue time, lease, left value,
   right value, and expected state. Add stale, duplicate, NaN, and out-of-range cases. A good test
   includes messages that must be rejected.

   PUBLICATION SOFTWARE BOUNDARY

   The dated repository hashes in SOURCE_SNAPSHOT.md identify the evidence inspected for this edition.
   Sensitive screenshots are excluded rather than cosmetically blurred. The source and fixtures support
   architecture lessons, but exact deployed versions, on-robot latency, failure-injection results, and a
   traced current compute diagram remain installation records. This volume makes no claim that a
   reader’s build or the current show robot has completed that qualification.




ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                                                         29 / 34
DEEP LAB


Trust, time, and authority
MISSION 9


A robot never receives ``just a
command''
A useful control message carries meaning in context: identity, role, session, sequence, issue time, lease,
units, bounds, and intended recipient. Transport reliability can deliver bytes in order, yet the application
must still decide whether those bytes are current, authorized, well formed, and safe to apply.


Discovery, authentication, and authorization
Discovery answers “What services are nearby?” Authentication answers “Can this peer prove the installed
identity?” Authorization answers “May this identity publish lidar, operate controls, or view video?” A certifi-
cate fingerprint can bind a controller to one robot, while a fresh challenge and keyed proof resist copied
or replayed conversations. None of these checks replaces command bounds or a physical stop.

  THE FOUR GATES

  Make four paper gates labeled Find, Prove, Permit, and Validate. Give each student a message card
  with a service name, device identity, role, sequence, age, and value. A card advances only when each
  gate’s rule passes. Try a real identity with the wrong role, an old sequence, and an out-of-range value.
  Explain why one successful gate cannot answer the others.



A face label is not a control credential
A camera may compare a consented face embedding with an encrypted local gallery and produce “likely
this enrolled person.” That is a probabilistic observation. A controller credential proves possession of a
device secret in a fresh authenticated session. Authorization then decides what that authenticated device
may do. These are different evidence types.

  SORT THE EVIDENCE

  Make cards labeled Face Match, Pairing Proof, Current Control Owner, Fresh Lease, Human Approval,
  and Physical Stop. For each pretend task—say hello, view a camera, drive forward, approve a gesture,
  or stop all motion—place every card that matters. Face Match may help choose a greeting, but never
  place it in the chain that grants motion, shell access, secrets, or approval. Add an Unknown Face card
  and show that the safe control result does not change.



Freshness is a continuously expiring claim
Suppose a command was valid when issued. Network delay, a paused app, or a lost controller can make it
dangerous later. A monotonic clock measures elapsed time without being confused by wall-clock correc-
tions. A lease says how long intent remains usable. Sequence numbers reject duplicates and reordering.
A watchdog chooses a defined response when renewal stops.

                                                     31
MISSION CONTROL                                                                          VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16



   LATENCY HAS A BUDGET
   End-to-end response includes sensing, sampling, encoding, queueing, network transit, validation,
   scheduling, actuation, and physical response. Measure distributions, not only one best case. Report
   typical behavior, high-percentile delay, worst observed cases, test conditions, and what happens
   after the deadline.




ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                        32 / 34
MISSION 10


Autonomy is a bounded state
machine
“Autonomous” should not mean “unlimited.” A bounded session has an owner, profile, start condition, ra-
dius or workspace, speed limit, required sensors, freshness rules, timeout, stop transitions, and evidence.
Manual control, stale perception, invalid calibration, internal faults, and operator stop can all end author-
ity.


                                     valid request               accepted

                          INACTIVE                   REQUESTED                     ACTIVE


                                                                            stop or fault



                                                     STOPPING




Perception is not a permission slip
A camera or lidar measurement may support a world model, but it cannot prove the path is safe outside
its field of view, range, calibration, timing, and tested conditions. Planning proposes a path through a
model. Validation checks policy and bounds. A deterministic executor converts an accepted action into
controlled outputs. Feedback tests whether reality agrees.

  OFFLINE MISSION SIMULATOR

  Draw a grid with a start, goal, obstacles, and unknown squares. One student reveals a sensor-limited
  neighborhood. One proposes a one-step move. One validates boundary, freshness, and collision
  rules. One records the new state. Add a stale sensor card and a manual-control card; both must end
  autonomous authority. No physical robot is used.

  AI PROPOSES; VERIFIED SOFTWARE DISPOSES

  Natural-language models can help interpret or propose, but physical actions need typed schemas,
  bounded parameters, current state, policy, human authority where required, deterministic execution,
  cancellation, telemetry, and honest unavailable results. Fluency is not evidence of calibration, reach-
  ability, collision clearance, or completion.




                                                        33
MISSION CONTROL                                                                                                          VOLUME 4 - AGES 12-16



Field words
ABSTRACTION             A simpler interface hiding internal de- used for comparison; it is not a password.
tail.
                                                                        LEASE     Permission that expires unless renewed.
AUTHENTICATION Proof of identity.
                                                                        PROCESS A running program with its own re-
AUTHORIZATION Rules about allowed actions.
                                                                        sources.
BACKPRESSURE What a system does when data ar-
rives too quickly.                             PROTOCOL An agreement about messages and be-
                                               havior.
CONSENT A person’s informed, changeable agree-
ment to a clearly stated use.                  SEQUENCE NUMBER A counter used to detect replay
COORDINATE FRAME A named origin and axes for or reordering.
measurements.                            SIMULATION A model used to test behavior without
EMBEDDING A model-produced number vector the full physical system.

   FINAL CHECK

   Can you trace a joystick command to the Arduino? Can you explain why discovery does not prove
   trust, why a recognized face is not authorization, and why video uses a separate connection? Can
   you place Messages, recording, and an AI proposal behind their own consent and policy gates? You
   are ready for the complete field manual.




Source trail: Current 2026-08-23 source snapshot: Cerebro, archived Cerebro v1-v5 history, ROBController, local ROBControllerVision (three
commits ahead of its remote), M2M1-RPLIDAR, Amber-HomeFolder, ROBTrainingGames, ORobotics, active docs, ROB base firmware, and
private gallery originals. Hardware-dependent and local-only evidence is labeled.


ORBITUS ROBOTICS - FIRST MAKER FAIRE EDITION                                                                                        34 / 34
